---
layout: page
title: Leren Qian
---

 

#### DEGREE & PROGRAM

-   Northeastern University, USA; Ph.D. in Industrial Engineering(Operations
    Research); 09/2017 - 08/2022 (expected)

-   Arizona State University, USA; M.S. in Computer Science(Big Data); 01/2020 -
    08/2021 (expected)

-   Donghua University, China; B.E. in Industrial Design; 09/2008 - 06/2012

-   Harvard Business School Publishing-Corporate New Leader Program;
    07/2015-12/2015

-   Certified Public Accountants (China)

#### RESEARCH & PROJECT

##### Research - Scheduling Optimization using Reinforcement Learning (in progress)

-   Designed the algorithm with Q-learning and local improvement heuristic to
    solve bell time optimization problem

-   Analyzed multi-objective combinatorial optimization model with difference
    parameter settings.

##### Research - Vehicle Routing and Scheduling for Boston Public Schools (in progress)

-   Implemented the large-scale routing model (more than 20k points) with bell
    time optimization.

-   Developed and implemented a new Dial-A-Ride model, realizing the capacitated
    VRP with pickup and delivery.

-   Conceived the heuristic approach using clustering, decomposing the problem
    size. Then implemented the open VRP model, solving the routing sub-problem.
    Compared the results with lower bounds generated by the Benders and the
    Lagrange decomposition algorithms.

##### Project - Radiation Therapy Optimization

-   Implemented the basic radiation therapy model to maximize the radiation
    intensity in tumor areas while minimize the intensity in critical areas.

-   Designed a heuristic approach applying constraint relaxation, generating
    feasible options for decision makers.

-   Optimized the model by developing a pattern generation method, generating
    feasible radiation patterns, converting the infeasible problem feasible and
    implementing the model using column generation theorem.

##### Project - Heuristic Approach for Auto-Feature Selection Clustering

-   Implemented the backward auto-feature selection algorithm during clustering
    process using Python, finding the specific operation patterns for companies
    in China stock market.

-   Redefined an improved BetaCV evaluation index to control the auto selection
    process, adding the considerations for domain knowledge in the process of
    feature selection.

-   Developed a heuristic approach adding weighted considerations into the
    auto-selection process, improving the performance for the clustering.

#### INDUSTRIAL EXPERIENCE

##### Project Control Specialist, Fluor Corporation; 07/2012 – 08/2017

-   Developed corporate progress control software based on MS Access database.

-   Developed and improved corporate project risk management software based on

-   Set up and optimized business pricing model for proposal projects (projects
    size from 5 million to over 200 million), including resources plan setup,
    risk assessment and finance cost reporting. Assessed project risk and
    proposed risk mitigation plan.

-   Developed the business plan and operation analysis, including backlog
    analysis, prospects forecast, scorecard calculation and operation
    performance analysis (for over 50 cost centers) on the monthly basis.

-   Analyzed and Optimized the taxes saving, benefits and burdens for worldwide
    employees and improved company policy (project working hours, per-diem and
    other cost related items). Developed office space planning based on the
    dynamic labor flow status to minimize the company overhead cost.

-   Control Lead for Shandong Shenchi LC-MAX Refinery project, Nike CLC
    Expansion Project, Jushi U.S. South Carolina.

-   Cost Engineer for BASF PA6 Shanghai Project and Fantasyland Shanghai Disney
    Resort Project.

-   Cost and Scheduling Engineer in Eli Lilly Suzhou East Lake Plant Insulin
    Filling.
