---
layout: post
category: Statistics
published: true
tags:
  - Statistics
title: ANOVA sample
---

**2020.03.04 Review for ANOVA:** Statistical-Method; **Programming**: R

**Factor Analysis of Chocolate Bar Rating using ANOVA**

 

**1.     Data Description**

The dataset is narrowly focused on the flavor of plain dark chocolate. It
contains expert ratings of over 1,700 individual chocolate bars, along with
information on their regional origin, cacao percentage, the variety of chocolate
bean used and where the beans were grown. The flavor, which is measured by
expert rating, is what the paper focused on.

Cacao percentage is the actual percentage of the components of the cacao bean
that are in chocolate. The amount of the cacao percentage is arrived at
differently by different chocolate companies, which is one of the reasons why
chocolate with the same cacao percentage tastes different. There are, of course,
other factors that go into making chocolate such as the type of cacao beans and
where they are from. So, we considered the 4 factors above that may
significantly affect the rating.

**2.     Objective**

The Objective of this factor analysis is to test if the selected variables,
which include cacao percentage, cacao bean origin, cacao bean type, and
chocolate company location, have effects on the dependent variable - the rating
of chocolate bars. If effects exist, which levels contribute to these effects.
Furthermore, checking to see if some interactions existed in the effect model is
also included in the aim of this analysis.

**3.     Analytical Procedures**

There are 5 major parts in the analytical procedures, which are data cleaning,
data visualization, ANOVA, multiple comparison and assumptions checking.

3.1   Data Cleaning

Firstly, missing values were checked in the dataset. Though there are nearly 50%
of missing values in the Bean_Type column, the bean type factor is considered to
be an important factor of rating. So we kept the Bean_Type column.

Secondly, bean origin and bean type factors were modified. There were 98 levels
of bean origin in the dataset. In order to lower the complexity of the model,
the levels of bean origin were filtered into South America and South Africa
countries, which are equatorial region where theobroma cacao thrives. Also, the
levels of bean type were filtered, left with three main chocolate bean types --
Criollo, Forastero and Trinitario.

Thirdly, cacao percentage factor is a continuous factor, so it was categorized
into 3 categories: below 65.5%(semisweet), 65.5%-74.5%(bittersweet), larger than
74.5%(extra bittersweet).The dataset after cleaning contains 5 columns with 248
samples.

 

Part of dataset is shown below:

 

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image002.jpg)

Figure 1  Part of the Dataset

 

3.2   Data Visualization

Boxplots and Interaction plots are used to visually present the relationship
between independent variables and dependent variables. Boxplots visually
compares the median, along with the quartile information all together for
different levels of factors, as well as presenting the extreme values within the
group. The other plot used in this step is interaction plot. Interaction Plots
are critical in factorial analysis as main effects might be masked by
interaction of variables. In the visualization step, interaction plots are
presented, visually providing the information that if interactions of variables
are present.

3.3   ANOVA

Null Hypothesis and alternative hypothesis are presented regarding different
levels of factors. The purpose of Analysis of Variance is to check which
variables have effects on the dependent variable, which are determined by the
P-value and level of significance predetermined. Based on the results of ANOVA
table, the conclusions of the significance of main effects and existence of
interaction are made.

3.4 Multiple Comparison

It could be concluded from the ANOVA result that if particular independent
variables have effects on the dependent variable. However, it is unknown that
which levels of factors are different than others. Thus the multiple comparison
method - Tukey’s test is used here to determine which levels of factors
contribute to the effects of factors. The test is only run on the significant
factors that have more than 2 levels. 

3.5 Assumptions Checking

After multiple comparisons, the assumptions of normality and homogeneity of
variance of Analysis of Variance are checked. Serious violations of assumptions
could lead to invalid conclusions. If there are violations of assumptions,
original data should be transformed to be normally distributed.

**4.     Statistical Analysis**

4.1   Data Visualization

4.1.1       Boxplots

The figure below shows the distribution of company location by ratings. It can
be concluded that Italy has the highest average rating and United States has the
lowest average rating. The ratings of companies located in France have the
largest deviation. It can be inferred that there exists a certain kind of
relationship between company location and rating.

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image004.jpg)

Figure 2-1  Ratings by Company Location

 

The relationship of ratings and bean origin is not clear as shown in the plot
below. It can be concluded that chocolate whose bean was from south america have
slightly higher average rating than chocolate whose bean was from south africa.

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image006.jpg)

Figure 2-2  Ratings by Bean Type

 

Difference in ratings of different bean types are obvious from the below figure.
Average rating of Criollo and Trinitario are close to each other, while
Forastero have relatively low average rating.

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image008.jpg)

Figure 2-3  Ratings by Bean Type

 

Cocoa percent is shown to have a clear relationship with rating in the picture
below. People tends to give high ratings to 50%-65% group, lower to 65.5%-74.5%
group, and lowest to above 75% type.  Ratings to 50%-65% group are not normally
distributed, and is right-skewed.

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image010.jpg)

Figure 2-4  Ratings by Cocoa Percent

 

4.1.2       Interaction Plots

There are 4 factors, for illustration purposes, let A represents CocaPercent,
while B represents Bean_Type, C for Bean_Origin, and D for company_location. In
total there are 6 two-factor interactions, which are AB, AC, AC, BC, BD, CD; 4
three-factor interactions, ABC, ABD, ACD, BCD; 1 four-factor interaction, which
is ABCD. Only the two-factor interaction plots are presented here.

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image012.jpg)

Figure 3-1  Interaction Plot of CocaPercent and Bean_Type (AB)

 

From the (AB) interaction plot, there’s no obvious interaction.

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image014.jpg)

Figure 3-2  Interaction Plot of CocaPercent and Bean_Origin (AC)

 

There’s obvious interaction in this plot. As CocaPercent increases, ratings
increases and then decreases for South America Bean, but ratings decreases first
and then increases for South Africa Bean. Bean from South America has the
highest rating at 65.5%-74.5%, while bean from South Africa has the lowest
rating at the same CocaPercent level.

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image016.jpg)

Figure 3-3  Interaction Plot of CocaPercent and Company_location (AD)

 

From this interaction plot, although the trend of the green line is not strictly
in accordance with red line and the blue line, it is safe to say that there’s no
interaction between A and D due to the interaction is too small to be noticed.

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image018.jpg)

Figure 3-4  Interaction Plot of Bean_Type and Bean_Origin (BC)

 

The overall trends of two lines are similar, which are decreasing first and then
increasing. Hence it could be concluded that no interaction is involved in BC.

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image020.jpg)

Figure 3-5 Interaction Plot of Bean_Type and Company_location (BD)

 

There is no interaction among the three lines.

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image022.jpg)

Figure 3-6 Interaction Plot of Bean_Origin and Company_location (CD)

 

There’s no interaction between these two lines. It is interesting to notice that
there is distinction among South Africa and South America Beans only in
Switzerland. 

 

**4.2   Analysis of Variance**

All main effects and interaction effects are included in the effect model. The
ANOVA shows below.

 

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image024.jpg)

Figure 4  ANOVA table

 

From the ANOVA results, by looking at the P-values, it is clearly shown that
Company_location has significant effects on the chocolate bar Rating, as the
P-value is less than 0.0001. Coca Percent and Bean_Type are also significant at
level of 0.05. What’s more, the interaction of CocaPercent and Bean_Origin is
significant. It is noticeable that the main effect of Bean_Origin is not
significant, this might be due to the interaction of Bean_Origin and
CocaPercent, which masks the main effect of Bean_Origin.

 

**4.3   Multiple Comparison**

4.3.1       Methods

Multiple Comparison

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image026.jpg)

Table1  Distribution Table

 

From the distribution table of the factors, it can be concluded that the the
number of people in each group is not equal. We applied below comparison
methods:

1)     Scheffe method is more robust and secure with the dataset like this. It
tests for a linear combination of the mean, rather than just checking the
difference between a pair of means. Because of this, it is relatively
conservative, and sometimes the difference in F value of variance analysis is
statistically significant.

2)     LSD is an improved version of t-test, using all samples in the
calculation of variation and degrees of freedom. It has the highest sensitivity.
This method has a problem of amplifying the alpha level (type 1 error).

3)     Tukey's honestly significant difference method (Tukey’s HSD), using the
Student-Range statistic for a pairwise comparison between all groups.

4)     Bonferroni test is developed from LSD test. The total alpha level is
controlled to be about 0.05. The sensitivity of the method is between the LSD
method and the Scheffe method.

 

4.3.2       Results

1)     Company Location (France, Italy, Switzerland, U.S.A):

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image028.jpg)

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image030.jpg)

Table 2-1  Multiple Comparison

 

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image032.jpg)

Figure 5-1 Estimated Means and Confidence Interval of Rating by Company
Locations

 

From the above table, all the four tests show the significant difference between
Italy and USA, and between France and USA. The plot visually shows the
difference between each level. USA is different from other levels probably
because it has the lowest estimated mean and relatively small confidence
interval.

 

   2)  Bean Type

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image034.jpg)

Table 2-1  Multiple Comparison

 

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image036.jpg)

Figure 5-2 Estimated Means and Confidence Interval of Rating by Bean Type

 

From the above table, only LSD test shows the significant difference between
Forastero and Criollo, and between Forastero and Trinitario. Others doesn’t test
the difference between Bean Type levels. However, the bean type variable is
significant in ANOVA test. The plot shows that the mean of Forastero group is
lower that Criollo and Trinitario, and it is not a significant different level
maybe because its large confidence interval.

 

3)  Cocoa Percent

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image038.jpg)

Table 2-3  Multiple Comparison

 

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image040.jpg)

Figure 5-3  Estimated Means and Confidence Interval of Rating by Cocoa Percent

 

From the above table, only LSD test shows the significant difference between 1
and 3, and between 2 and 3. Others doesn’t test the difference between Cocoa
Percentage levels. However, the cocoa percentage variable is significant in
ANOVA test. The plot shows that the mean of 3 group is lower than 1 group, and 3
group is lower than 2 group. They are not significant different levels maybe
because the large confidence interval of 1,2 and 3.

 

4.4   Assumption Checking

 

Independency observations often holds if each case (row of cells in SPSS)
represents a unique person or other statistical unit. That is, we usually don't
want more than one row of data for one person, which holds for our data;

Normal distribution: variables in the population seems reasonable if we look at
the histograms we inspected earlier. Besides, violation of the normality
assumption is no real issue for larger sample sizes due to the central limit
theorem.

Homogeneity means that the population variances of BDI in each medicine group
are all equal, reflected in roughly equal sample variances. Again, our split
histogram suggests this is the case but we'll try and confirm this by including
Levene's test when running our ANOVA.

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image042.jpg)

Figure 6  Levene’s Test

 

Since the null hypothesis is variances are equal and the alternative hypothesis
is at least one of the variances is not equal to others. From the test we can
see that the test is not significant, which means that the null hypothesis
cannot be rejected. Hence there is no enough evidence to say that variances are
different.

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image044.jpg)

Figure 7-1 Normal Q-Q Plot

 

It could be concluded from the Normal Q-Q plot that the data follows normal
distribution, but not following normal distribution strictly, especially the
tail parts.

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerenqian/lerenqian.github.io/master/_posts/image/ANOVA/clip_image046.jpg)

Figure 7-2  Residual Plot

 

The residual plot shows that the data is not entirely random, although the
violation is minor. It could be seen that the trend of the residuals become
smaller as fitted value becomes larger.

 

**5.     Conclusion**

The ANOVA test shows that the effects of Coca Percent, Bean Type, Company
Location and the interaction of Coca Percent and Bean Origin have significant
effects on Coca Ratings, where the Company Location has the most significant
impact.

The company location is the most significant variable. Different countries have
different cultures about food, so the different cultures bring out different
appetite for chocolate. So it’s not hard to conclude that flavor of chocolate
varies in different countries. Bean type is also a significant variable.
Forastero gives chocolate its full-bodied flavor, Criollos tastes delicate yet
complex, and Trinitario is the predomiant fine flavor cocoa. Cocoa percentage
can significantly affect the ratings intuitively, because the higher it goes,
the bitter yet more long-lasting the flavor is.

The paper used 4 multiple comparison tests (Tukey HSD, Scheffe, Bonferroni and
LSD). They imply that there are significant difference between ratings of
chocolate whose company locates in Italy and in USA, also whose company locates
in France and in USA. If given two choices Italy and USA or France and USA, you
can safely choose Italy or France in order to enjoy better flavor. However,
Tukey HSD, Scheffe, Bonferroni tests failed to give conclusions to other
significant variables in the ANOVA test. The possible reasons are given below.

From the normal Q-Q plot and the residual plot we can see that the distribution
of data is not strictly normal and the residuals are not entirely random. Since
F test is sensitive, small violations of normality would cause change of
p-value, this could possibly explain that the results shown by multiple
comparisons are not entirely consistent with the p-value in ANOVA test. The
large confidence interval of each level may also be the reason that the
difference cannot be shown in the results of Tukey HSD, Scheffe, Bonferroni
tests. We can also conclude from the experiment that LSD is the most sensible
test.

As a thought for future exploration, other variables need to be considered, like
the roasting time and temperature, the percentage of milk and sugar, etc.

 

**6.     Reference**

[1] Walpole, R. E., Myers, R. H., Myers, S. L., & Ye, K. (2012). Probability &
statistics for engineers & scientists (9th edition.). Boston: Prentice Hall.

 [2] Zanatta, G. (2016, June). My first Kernel: Chocolate Bar Ratings Dataset.
Retrieved from
<https://www.kaggle.com/gzanatta/my-first-kernel-chocolate-bar-ratings-dataset>

[3] STHDA. One-Way ANOVA Test in R [Web log post]. Retrieved from
<http://www.sthda.com/english/wiki/one-way-anova-test-in-r#infos>
